- Gold mining in South Africa,
it is an industry that is centuries old.
People are risking everything
to support themselves and their families.
- Desperate pleas from two
kilometers underground,
hundreds of people are trapped
in this mine in South Africa.
- People are dying here.
Please help, please, please.
- How many days must you
live in a situation like this?
- This footage is showing
piles of dead
and starving people.
- We must call this
what it is.
This is a Stilfontein massacre.
- Illegal mining
and gold theft have cost
the country 41 billion rand.
Illegal mining is not a mining activity,
but a criminal activity.
It is a war on the economy.
- We're not sending help to criminals.
We're going to smoke them out.
- Mining is a big deal in
South Africa, even though
as an industry it's in decline.
- As of 2024, there are
around 6,200 abandoned or derelict mines.
They're no longer profitable.
The mining companies up and leave.
The illegal miners then enter
to take whatever minimal deposits
may be left in that space
to support themselves and their families.
- At some point
people started calling
illegal miners zama zamas.
A direct translation would be
to try and try again.
You don't have a job.
You don't have a means
to feed your family,
and so you're trying whatever you can
to make things work, to make ends meet.
The South African government
currently estimates
that they're losing potentially
around 60 billion rand in revenue
because of illegal mining that
happens across the country.
Operation Vala Umgodi
is a multidisciplinary
law enforcement operation.
It is a project to crack
down on illegal mining.
In August, 2024, Vala Umgodi
officially came to Stilfontein.
- The Vala Umgodi task team
are blocking routes used
to deliver food in their
operation against illegal mining.
- The number of miners remaining
underground is still unknown.
- We have identified certain shafts used
by these illegal miners
to take food underground.
They're not getting a chance now
to use those particular shafts.
- Vala Umgodi had been happening
for about a year at that point
around the country where
they had used similar tactics
of choking supply and people
had simply resurfaced.
But what was different
about Stilfontein is the
architecture of that shaft.
It is literally a two
kilometer drop into the earth.
If people above ground are
not able to pull you up,
there is no way for you to get out.
- If you move from one shaft to another,
there's no infrastructure
to move between the two.
So you're basically
wriggling through a tunnel,
but the tunnel is flooded.
There are boulders and things
sticking out from all angles.
Bear in mind that you are hungry,
so your physical strength
is obviously non-existent
at that point.
It was physically demanding
For some it took days.
Only a very small group of them
were actually able to make
that journey successfully.
- Illegal mining is not a mining activity,
but a criminal activity and
it is a war on the economy.
- Illegal mining is such a divisive issue.
The mining companies are
losing money from the shafts
which are still operational.
So from a government perspective,
you're losing a lot of revenue, right?
- Those people who are committing acts
of criminality will want
to hide away from law
enforcement agencies.
- The majority of illegal
miners are foreign nationals
who are undocumented.
- Members of the defence force
arrested more than 80 illegal
mining suspects.
This area has long been
experiencing violent crimes
suspected to be linked
to zama zama turf wars.
- You do get the organised syndicates
that have spotted an opportunity.
They are gangs that are
terrorizing communities.
- Theses zama zamas were
disrupting life of citizens there.
- Everybody is worried about their safety.
We've had previous police officers killed.
- We want stability, we
want order, we want peace.
- Initially, the reports
were that people were
staging some kind of a sit-in underground,
that these were just
entitled people that didn't
want to be arrested,
and so there
was no sympathy at all.
- We cut off the food,
water and necessity supply.
We are quite confident that
with this particular strategy,
they will be forced to come up.
- Why should they be helped?
Why should state resources be
committed to assisting people
that were robbing the country of revenue?
- You want us to send help to criminals.
Honestly, we're not
sending help to criminals.
We're going to smoke them
out. They will come out.
- But actually the police
are refusing to help people
that are trapped underground,
not just refusing to resurface.
- What you do see now is
community members stepping in
and demanding to go
and rescue these illegal
miners themselves.
- You can't just come and
stand on top of the shaft
while people that are alive.
Even if you are dead,
you must be taken out.
- A group of 50 men from the
community signed indemnity
forms and started pulling
up illegal miners underground
while others are watching from a distance.
- We are here at Shaft 11.
the operation has been halted.
- The minister of police
say that the current efforts
that are being used by
the locals are not safe.
- As Christmas and Hanukkah
approach, activists
and families say they cannot
celebrate while the miners
remain in darkness and starving.
- The state has told the
High Court in Pretoria
that the Stilfontein
miners are not trapped,
but evading arrest.
- What government told us, they said,
these are criminals underground.
We will not give them assistance.
- Those who don't want
to get out, it's simply
because they're avoiding arrest.
- We are allowing for
a situation where
a significant number
of lives are are going to be lost.
- We must call this what it is now.
This is a Stilfontein massacre.
- I think government
came to the realisation
that there was this tragedy unfolding
because it is the police
stopping people from providing them
with supplies and from bringing them up,
and so I think that also
motivated the courts
to then compel government
to allow the formal rescue operation.
- The North Gauteng
High Court ordered
that mine rescue services begin operations
to rescue illegal miners.
Is underway for 10 days.
Then after 10 days, we'll
stop to assess.
- It's quite an advanced
machine that we're using.
The cage has got a camera at the bottom.
It's got a camera inside the cage
and also in the top we can
see whether there's any
obstructions or whether
it's safe to raise or lower
the conveyance.
- National Police spokesperson
Athlenda Mathe says
officers will not be going underground
to rescue illegal miners
at a mine in Stilfontein.
Mathe says the zama zamas
could be heavily armed, posing
a serious risk to officers.
- As a responsible government,
we are not going to be allowing our men
and women in blue as well as
our soldiers to go down there.
- The police themselves
refused to go down underground
because there was anxieties
and fears around what they
would find, if they would be
walking into a war zone,
and so they needed volunteers essentially
from the community.
Mandla was one of those
guys that was a part of
that operation.
- Mandla Charles is saying that
he's willing to go down
and assist in terms of
ensuring that those that are
underground are able to be pulled onto
the service.
- The most chilling aspect of
it was seeing the amount of
forensic pathology vehicles,
vehicles that were there
to collect dead bodies,
and to see how many of
them were going in and out.
It was just such a
strong, sickening stench
and that points to just
how badly decomposed
those bodies were.
- From the community perspective,
I think it was mostly a sense of defeat
because they'd been screaming
at the top of their lungs
for months that this
tragedy was unfolding.
I think there's a sense that it's kind
of been forgotten and that
government has gotten away
scot-free.
People lost breadwinners.
The ecosystem has shut down.
The residents there
described Stilfontein as a ghost town.
The economy was basically
shut down in a day.
- Gold mining in South Africa,
it is an industry that is centuries-old.
Families are involved in
mining throughout generations.
Given that it's a sunset industry,
there aren't as many jobs
as they were before.
When you speak to people, they'll tell you
that they are being attacked
for doing the best that they can do.
The alternative to what
they're doing would be crime.
Illegal miners, zama zamas like Mandla
and others, they've not been
able to feed their families
for months.
And they're so defiant.
You'll hear them telling you
that the minute the police
leave that shaft, they
will be back underground.
They're not going to think twice about it.
And the story really
highlights the legacy issue
around gold mining in particular.
- I think from a community
aspect, they're looking
for some sense of acknowledgement
from the government.
Some form of compensation for the loss
of life that occurred there.
- We are here as
victims.
Those people died underground
and nothing happens as of
today nobody's in jail.
- But it's also I think, a very real anger
that this is their way of living.
And government refuses
to acknowledge that.
- There have been longstanding
calls from groups
to say formalize artisanal mining.
It's something that happens
elsewhere in the world.
When you speak to some of
theses zama zamas,
not all of them are
for the formalization
because they feel that they may not get
the rewards or profit that
they're getting at the moment.
Most of them are just
saying, "Just leave us alone."
You failed in your
mandates to provide jobs
or environments that create
jobs for us to be able to work
and provide for our families.
So just leave us be.
- Stop killing our people!
Stop killing the people of Stilfontein!
We have trusted you with
our votes, but you have sold us out
and there is only one solution.
- Revolution!
- One solution!
- We commit the body to the ground.
- Earth to earth.
Ashes to ashes, dust to dust.